How do you describe to somebody how hard
it is to build a house today?
>> It's easier to build a McMansion in the
United States than it is to build
affordable housing for people.
>> I have a hard time wrapping my head
around how this happened and why we're
here.
>> I will not sugarcoat it. Our housing
deficit is significant and needs
significant public sector capital and
private capital to get us even moving in
the right direction.
3 million, 5 million, 7 million, exact
estimates vary, but America has a severe
shortage of homes. And in some parts of
the country, it's even more extreme.
Cities like Chicago, Miami, Honolulu,
and New York have some of the worst
shortages in the country.
>> Fresh data shows the cost of becoming a
homeowner is increasingly out of reach
for many Americans.
>> Home sales in 2024 fell to the lowest
amount in almost 30 years.
>> Home prices are climbing.
>> People can't afford the mortgages. It's
become unsustainable.
>> Rents have steadily increased, but
household incomes haven't kept up.
According to Zillow, in January, the
typical asking rent was close to $2,000.
>> And Wall Street has become a significant
player in the housing market.
>> Why are rents rising so much? Big Wall
Street firms are playing a role.
>> But will these large financial
institutions help solve the crisis or
make things worse?
We're about to go talk to Don Mullen,
who was one of the key traders that bet
against the mortgage market and big
financial companies leading up to the
financial crisis in 2008.
We're interviewing Don Mullen on the
Highline because he was one of the early
investors and it helped kind of
revitalize this area in New York City.
So, we're going to talk about what makes
a good neighborhood and an investable
neighborhood for people like him.
>> So, you grew up in New Jersey?
>> Sure. My parents and I live with my
grandmother in a two-bedroom apartment.
We lived on food stamps for a while. We
never had any money. My parents like to
tell the story that when they got
married, they had like uh $25 in their
bank account and my mom bought a bathing
suit with it and that was there and then
they were broke.
>> Mullen got his first summer job in
finance while at college and quickly
shot up through the ranks of investment
banking. You have always been one of
those stories that so many people have
not heard about on Wall Street that
became very large over a matter of time
through
>> well it's a long period of time since
I'm 67 so it wasn't like it happened
suddenly
>> well some of those moments were kind of
more publicized and in front of the
world than others 2008 being one of them
>> true not everybody gets their emails
read in front of Congress
>> in 2010 Mullen's emails were read at a
Senate hearing as part of an
investigation into whether key financial
executives prioritized profits over the
stability of the housing market during
the 2008 crisis.
>> Goldman Sachs made quite a bit of money
when Moody's credit rated agency
downgraded 32 billion in tripleB and
tripleB minus bonds. Donald Mullen
emails you and says, "Sounds like we
will make some serious money."
>> As an executive at Goldman Sachs, Mullen
had a front row seat to the 2008 housing
crisis. While Goldman was selling
mortgage back securities to clients, and
many financial firms were chasing after
these risky assets, Mullen's team bet
that they would fail, and fail they did.
This pivotal moment in the crisis was
later immortalized in the film, The Big
Short.
>> So, you're offering us a chance to short
this pile of blocks. How?
>> With something called a credit default
swap.
So you knew years before the world knew
that the crisis was brewing or at least
some problem was brewing.
>> Something bad was going to happen and
chaos would ensue.
>> So you're kind of like the character in
Big Short that nobody knows about.
>> Well, I'm kind of a nerdy guy, so that
makes sense, right?
>> In the fallout from the crisis, home
prices cratered and that's when Mullen
saw an opportunity buying foreclosed
homes and converting them to rentals.
You helped lead the big short in Goldman
Sachs, but then on the way out, you took
$25 million of your own money and you
started buying up houses when they were
at very depressed prices.
>> Yes. Tens of millions of Americans were
not able to pay their mortgages. So,
what I start to do is I start to travel
to all the places of high default
intensity. I went to Tampa, Riverside
County, Las Vegas, and Phoenix, and I
walked neighborhoods where there was
like a bunch of houses were in
foreclosure.
I looked at it and said, "We have a lot
of defaulted houses. There's people who
need to rent those houses, and so
repurposing those houses for rentals
could be very good for both the economy
and for investors."
[Music]
>> Mullen left Goldman to start Freddy and
Partners, which quickly became one of
America's largest corporate landlords.
>> There used to be the American dream,
which had home ownership as a huge part
of that dream. Well, I'd first say, why
is buying a home the dream?
>> Well, let me give you my mother's
argument.
>> Okay.
>> Why are you paying so much money in
rent, Chanali? Why aren't you sure
>> buying a home and building wealth
instead?
>> Totally. That was a phenomena that is a
relatively recent one in the terms of
American history, but it had secondary
effects that weren't always good.
Reduced labor mobility. If you look,
we're at the lowest level of labor
mobility in like modern history because
people are locked into their houses
because of low mortgage rates. But also,
how about the fact that how many
Americans have lost money because they
bought a house?
>> How many?
>> Everybody in Detroit, lots of people in
Cleveland.
>> Today, the number of renter households
in the US is growing three times faster
than homeowner households, signaling a
major shift in American home ownership.
This trend traces back to the 2008
housing crash when construction slowed
dramatically and the US never caught up.
Restrictive zoning laws have limited
where and what kinds of housing can be
built. The cost of raw materials has
gone up, coupled with a labor shortage.
And in the last 5 years, mortgage rates
have more than doubled due to inflation.
This has all led to historically high
home prices that are out of reach for
most Americans without significant
capital. So more people are renting for
longer. And this has been good business
for corporate landlords like Predium.
But their business model has faced
significant criticism.
>> Today, dozens of people confronted
corporate landlords demanding livable
and affordable housing.
>> All of this attracting Wall Street
money. Big companies like Black Rockck,
KKR, JP Morgan Asset Management. They're
buying these houses, renting them out,
and squeezing out firsttime home buyers.
>> People talk a lot about private equity
home ownership these days. People are
really worried about it. How do you
gauge if it's better or worse?
>> I think it's better. Why? The people
often focus just singularly on an
individual family who wants to buy a
house, and we have the greatest respect
for that. What I feel upset by is the
way we treat the renter. We're having
the opportunity for people to rent
houses and aspirational communities.
This is one of the greatest tools for
people who more often than not, if you
look at all the residents in our 90,000
houses, most will never own a house in
their life. the combination of their
FICO scores, the combination of their
student loan debt, the way their life
turned out for some reason, they will be
renters, but they can still raise their
children in great school districts. So,
as a result, from our perspective, we
created more access to better
communities.
>> So, how do you think about what is
economically viable in terms of housing
development?
>> Sure. We focus on housing vouchers.
That's, you know, where people who have
like 30% area median income can move in
to those aspirational communities. We
had a test case of it in Atlanta where a
public housing project was condemned and
so the mayor and the FHFA asked us to
help them find answers for 60 families.
We were able to move a goodly chunk of
them and they ended up living in
suburban communities with better
schools.
The share of single family rentals owned
by institutional investors varies widely
by city, but their presence is
especially strong in the Sunb Belt. In
Atlanta, for example, companies now own
roughly 25% of all single family rental
homes.
>> Atlanta has a higher than average
percentage of institutional home
ownership. Why is that? There was strong
demographic growth and there was a
tremendous demand for housing too for
new construction and unfortunately it
had an explosive growth during the last
finan financial crisis. So there was a
lot of houses in foreclosure. So lots of
individuals and businesses bought homes
there.
>> In 2012 institutional investor
Blackstone kicked off a trend of buying
up homes in Atlanta and home prices
there have since skyrocketed. What do
you make of the argument that people
have that institutional capital comes
into a city and it forces prices higher?
>> The data does not hold that.
>> While some studies do tie institutional
homeowners to rising home prices, a
recent analysis observed no consistent
correlation between investor share and
price movements. While other reports say
that investors might have been better at
choosing neighborhoods with growing
housing demand, so home prices might
have risen regardless.
But for now, the national market share
of institutional homeowners is still
relatively small.
>> So you're you're a very large homeowner.
Yes. But more than 90,000 homes in
>> drop in the ocean. Institutional home
ownership is less than 3% of homes
rented. If it's 3% or less than 3% as
you say now, where is it in 10, 20, 30
years?
>> Well, I mean, we need acceptance of this
as a good answer for Americans, not the
false narrative of this making it harder
for people to buy a home when it's
actually a good outcome for people who
can't or choose not to. And so, from my
perspective, you won't see the industry
grow until that is put to the side.
Generally speaking though, we as an
industry have been providing our capital
to homebuilders now for rental
communities.
I think renting is for most people a
journey whether it's a journey for their
children so they own or mostly I prefer
that everybody has the opportunity to
own as long as they own a house in the
right place that's going to create value
for them.
>> People need somewhere to live.
>> Absolutely. I think that's the most
important part of this whole thing. More
capital needs to go into the business to
build more apartment buildings, more
houses. If you want to have housing, you
have to unleash capitalism. There is
nothing better. But it has to get a
return.
[Music]
Margaret Anadu has dedicated her career
to addressing the deeper structural
issues behind housing inequality and
access. Anadu spent nearly two decades
at Goldman Sachs where she was chair of
their urban investment group, a
specialized team focused on impact
investing, including preservation of
affordable housing. Today she's a senior
partner at Vistria Group where she
focuses on investments that deliver both
financial returns and social impact
particularly in affordable housing.
Vistria recently raised $2.8 billion to
advance that work.
>> Hi.
I am taking you to an amazing building
up in the Bronx. One of the first
investments in the strategy
This building that you're actually about
to see was built under gosh one of one
of New York City's um oldest affordable
housing program. I don't know if you're
familiar with Mitchell Lamas.
>> No.
>> So, it was funny cuz Tim Shalamé like
said it in an interview recently.
>> I grew up in like a Mitchellama. You
know about Mitchell Lama? Mitchama?
>> Oh, yeah. The the restaurant stars or
whatever.
>> No, no, no, no, no. about Mitchell Lama
is like Mitchell Lama program provides
affordable rental and cooperative
housing to moderate and middle inome
families.
>> Yeah, dude. Wow.
>> It's called the Mitchell Lama because
those are the last names of the specific
state senators that created the
legislation. But it created over a
100,000 units of affordable housing
between the mid50s and the late '7s. And
roughly a third of them are already
gone. We're losing units every year
because the regulations expire and
because they're not in good condition.
So, if I know anything about you, I do
know that you did this because it's a
job that you love to do, but it's you
you do this because it's personal to
you.
>> It is personal. Housing is it's
everything. It's so determinative. It it
was for me.
I grew up in a neighborhood in Houston.
And I had to get bust across town to go
to a good school. I woke up every day
and 30 minutes later I was in a very
different community with very different
opportunities. And so from a very young
age I was always cognizant that some
neighborhoods have a lot of just great
inherent qualities that I learn later
come from investment and some
neighborhoods don't. So, it was kind of
like luck and destiny in a way for me to
end up at Goldman Sachs, then have that
really great experience in the Urban
Investment Group and still be doing this
work today.
At Goldman, we had decided that we
wanted to invest in underinvested
communities like the Bronx where we're
headed now, neighborhoods in New
Orleans, the south side of Chicago, all
of these neighborhoods that have, you
know, great communities, tons of
promise, but just haven't really seen
institutional capital. And so the idea
that we were going to focus on those
places certainly with an eye towards
returns and making money but doing that
while also being productive for those
communities.
I think what is hard for me to wrap my
head around is the fact that it used to
be so much of the wealth creation for a
household. Much of the appreciation and
wealth that you would have is also the
appreciation of your home price.
>> Definitely.
>> And it's not something that we could
have anymore. I think that it's one
thing, you know, for earlier generations
who saw housing prices go up and up and
up and up and up. So much wealth was in
those homes. We all saw the financial
crisis, right?
>> We we saw those net assets wiped out. We
saw housing prices decline
significantly.
>> The home was no longer a safe asset.
>> Yeah. And so I I think that has created,
you know, really better awareness and
understanding that owning a home is not
guaranteed wealth creation. It's just
not. And I think that we think a lot
about stable, consistent housing as home
ownership. What I think we need to
strive towards is being able to create
that stability through renting as well.
>> How does the government step in to help
fix this? Affordable housing is is is
just like market rate housing. You have
you have revenues and you have expenses.
And to make the housing affordable for
families, you either need an
intervention on the revenue side in
terms of what the actual families can
pay.
>> Um
>> like a subsidy.
>> Yeah. Like rental assistance. On the
expense side, you have state and local
governments. They'll say, "You know
what? If you meet the policy objective
of creating, preserving, improving
affordable housing, we're going to give
you a break on the property taxes.
>> So, what does this mean for investors?
>> Affordable and workforce housing is a
place where they want to be invested.
One, because there's just significant
need. there's such a dare of capital in
this space. But two, when you can create
and preserve housing that is affordable
to all the folks who are like, you know,
can't find affordable place to live,
what you have is tenants who want to
stay there, who want to be there. So
when you can figure out those
partnerships and make those investments,
you're getting really great returns and
it's also lower risk.
Public private partnerships for housing
have played a key role in providing
affordable housing across the US for
years, but they're currently under
threat from the Trump administration,
which has been aggressively scaling back
federal equity programs and cutting
support for key housing initiatives.
>> A new set of federal cuts at the hands
of the Trump administration will impact
the number of grants the US Department
of Housing and Urban Development can
offer to organizations.
So is private equity a bad thing for for
the housing market?
>> I think what's been lost in the
conversation is on the multif family
side. Multif family housing in the US
has been institutionally owned, built
with private capital, finance and owned
with private capital for for a long
time.
I would love more of the discussion to
be how do we get some of those quite
frankly same investors and entities to
focus on the affordability of that
housing.
All right, looks like we're here.
So, the whole building is 318 units. We
actually only have two units that we can
see right now because it is 99%
occupied. And if you came here tomorrow,
those two units would probably be gone
>> that fast.
>> Yeah. The rent is about 2,000 a month.
So, I mean, people pay I mean, the
average onebedroom in New York City is
more than double that. So, this is very
affordable.
>> So, how are you able to make it that
affordable?
>> It's the partnership with the city.
>> And you were saying also that this was
at risk of no longer being affordable.
>> Absolutely.
[Music]
So, one of the things I love about this
building, it actually has really big
units. So, this is a almost unheard of
in New York, like a really nice size
threebedroom. There's the first bedroom,
then the second bedroom. Has a couple
bathrooms. We actually just redid this
one.
>> So, what are we looking at over there?
>> So, some of those were built under the
same program that this building was
built under. The unfortunate difference
is many of those buildings are no longer
affordable.
>> So what you're doing is really rare.
>> You know, I would say it is. It's rare
at the scale we're doing it.
>> While it's still rare for financial
firms to lead with a social impact
strategy like Vistria does, a growing
number of major investors are expanding
into affordable housing. Large
investment firms like Blackstone and New
have collectively committed billions of
dollars to these initiatives in recent
years.
>> So if you did not buy this building,
what would have happened to it?
>> So when a when affordability
restrictions expire, someone can buy the
property, remove the affordability, and
then take it to market. And so that that
prices out the individuals and families
that are living there. So we were able
to do what you call preservation. And
it's all part of the continuum of what
we're doing around sort of private
investing, the affordable housing space.
There's there's new construction of
course, but there's also this important
part about we have to take the
affordable housing we have like this and
keep it affordable.
>> Why do you think it's so hard to get
people to invest in affordable housing?
>> I think there are a few reasons. One, I
think it's changing. So, I think that
there's been more focus and
institutional capital in affordable
housing than I've ever seen in, you
know, decades that I've been doing this.
But I think part of it is um their
perception issues. So one, the idea that
investing in affordable housing can be a
sound commercial investment um is
something that people are now starting
to learn and understand. Those public
private partnerships are really key.
They are the core of everything we do.
You know, even the building we're
standing in. And I think there are a lot
of investors who who just aren't um as
experienced in working with the public
sector. It's not it's not their
strategy. and that to do affordable
housing well, responsibly, profitably,
it is about partnering with the public
sector.
>> A lot of people look around and they say
that okay, Wall Street is the problem.
They caused 2008, but at the same time,
you need that money to come from
somewhere. When I think about the
capital that is needed to both build
many more units and invest significant
capital into the units that already
exist to bring them up to a better
standard to make them much more
environmentally sustainable, we're not
talking billions. We're talking
trillions. The private sector needs to
be involved and the public sector needs
to be involved just for the amount of
capital that it's required.
>> Right. There's a whole lot of money
needed.
>> Yes.
Private equity's growing footprint in
the housing market is one of the most
controversial stories in real estate
today. Critics see it as a threat to
affordability and community control,
while others see it as a way to increase
the housing stock. One thing is clear,
the affordability crisis isn't going
away. The US needs millions of units and
fast. Governments can't fund the gap
alone. So the question isn't whether
private capital will play a role. It's
what kind of role it should play.
[Music]